docs(forms): adding forms strategy to washing machine workflow (#6584)
adobe/spectrum-web-components: CONTRIBUTOR-DOCS/03_project-planning/05_strategies/forms-strategy-rfc.md

<!-- Generated breadcrumbs - DO NOT EDIT -->

[CONTRIBUTOR-DOCS](../../README.md) / [Project planning](../README.md) / Strategies / Forms Strategy: 2nd-Gen Proposal

<!-- Document title (editable) -->

# Forms Strategy: 2nd-Gen Proposal

<!-- Generated TOC - DO NOT EDIT -->

<details open>
<summary><strong>In this doc</strong></summary>

- [Summary](#summary)
- [Value Impact](#value-impact)
    - [Accessibility](#accessibility)
    - [Consumer Experience](#consumer-experience)
    - [Author Maintenance](#author-maintenance)
- [1. Why Change?](#1-why-change)
- [2. Scope](#2-scope)
- [3. Recommendations](#3-recommendations)
    - [3.1 Form participation: ElementInternals / FACE](#31-form-participation-elementinternals--face)
    - [3.2 Where ARIA roles live](#32-where-aria-roles-live)
    - [3.3 IDREF strategy: label, help text, and errors](#33-idref-strategy-label-help-text-and-errors)
    - [3.4 axe-core policy](#34-axe-core-policy)
- [4. Naming table](#4-naming-table)
- [5. Migration path](#5-migration-path)
- [6. Open questions](#6-open-questions)
- [Appendix A: PoC findings](#appendix-a-poc-findings)

</details>

<!-- Document content (editable) -->

## Summary

> This proposal records the team's recommended direction for **2nd-gen form fields** (text field, checkbox, radio, picker, combobox, and similar) before scaling migration. It synthesizes the proof-of-concept findings for text field and combobox as form-associated custom elements, plus the cross-root ARIA `referenceTarget` shim research. The core decisions are: form fields participate in forms through the **ElementInternals / form-associated custom element (FACE)** API; ARIA roles default to the **host** unless a control class needs otherwise; label, help text, and error text associate through **IDREF relationships** that use a cross-root-safe pattern; and **axe-core** exclusions are documented, not silent.

Reviewer: Same concern here with "and similar". Might not be an issue but I worry about hallucinations or claude making assuptions.

Author: That's a good call. I can remove that to ensure precision here.

> This proposal records the team's recommended direction for **2nd-gen form fields** (text field, checkbox, radio, picker, combobox, and similar) before scaling migration. It synthesizes the proof-of-concept findings for text field and combobox as form-associated custom elements, plus the cross-root ARIA `referenceTarget` shim research. The core decisions are: form fields participate in forms through the **ElementInternals / form-associated custom element (FACE)** API; ARIA roles default to the **host** unless a control class needs otherwise; label, help text, and error text associate through **IDREF relationships** that use a cross-root-safe pattern; and **axe-core** exclusions are documented, not silent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal records the team's recommended direction for **2nd-gen form fields** (text field, checkbox, radio, picker, combobox, and similar) before scaling migration. It synthesizes the proof-of-concept findings for text field and combobox as form-associated custom elements, plus the cross-root ARIA `referenceTarget` shim research. The core decisions are: form fields participate in forms through the **ElementInternals / form-associated custom element (FACE)** API; ARIA roles default to the **shadow DOM**, with an explicit host-role exception for button-like and radio-like controls (see [§3.2](#32-where-aria-roles-live)); label, help text, and error text associate through **IDREF relationships** that use a cross-root-safe pattern; and **axe-core** exclusions are documented, not silent.

```

2. **A shared naming table.** Property, slot, and event names come from one table, so text-like fields and pickers stay aligned and migration reviews are faster.

---

## 1. Why Change?

1st-gen form controls vary in how they participate in forms, where roles live, and how label/help/error text is associated. Some rely on a nested light-DOM `<input>`; some manage validity by hand; cross-root ARIA relationships are inconsistent. Scaling 2nd-gen migration without a single agreed direction would multiply that inconsistency across every field. This proposal fixes the direction once so contributors do not re-litigate it per component.

---

## 2. Scope

**In scope:** the recommended direction for form participation, role placement, IDREF/label/help/error association, and axe policy, plus a naming table contributors follow during migration.

**Out of scope:** implementing a shared form-field mixin, migrating a specific production component, and full validation UI. Those are tracked as follow-up work.

---

## 3. Recommendations

### 3.1 Form participation: ElementInternals / FACE

> 2nd-gen form fields are **form-associated custom elements**: set `static formAssociated = true`, attach internals with `this.attachInternals()`, and mirror value and validity through `setFormValue()` and `setValidity()`. Do not nest a hidden light-DOM `<input>` to participate in forms.

Reviewer: I believe this is the same text from the washing machine doc, so I think we could be safe to remove it at the higher level and let the internal instructions speak for themselves.

> 2nd-gen form fields are **form-associated custom elements**: set `static formAssociated = true`, attach internals with `this.attachInternals()`, and mirror value and validity through `setFormValue()` and `setValidity()`. Do not nest a hidden light-DOM `<input>` to participate in forms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2nd-gen form fields are **form-associated custom elements**: set `static formAssociated = true`, attach internals with `this.attachInternals()`, and mirror value through `setFormValue()`. A `setValidity()` pass-through on `FieldAssociationController` is proposed but not yet implemented — *pending research*.

```

- **Shared controller:** a **`FieldAssociationController`** wraps `ElementInternals` to handle value submission, the disabled cascade, and form reset once, so text field, checkbox, and combobox do not each reimplement it.
- **Browser / AT notes:** Chromium and Safari expose `ElementInternals` ARIA more consistently than Firefox; verify exposure manually in Firefox (see [§3.4](#34-axe-core-policy)).

### 3.2 Where ARIA roles live

The role element lives in the **shadow DOM**, not on the host. This is a deliberate design decision: keeping the role element inside the shadow root enables CSS encapsulation and lets slotted label and description content associate through same-root `aria-labelledby` / `aria-describedby` ID references, while external (light-DOM) label sources use cross-root element-reference properties (see [§3.3](#33-idref-strategy-label-help-text-and-errors)).

- **Default:** the inner control element in the shadow DOM carries the role.

> - **Consequence:** because the host has no role, an axe-core scan of the host alone reports a false positive; this is expected and handled by the axe policy in [§3.4](#34-axe-core-policy).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Exception — button-like and radio-like controls:** these put the role on the **host** instead, via `ElementInternals` (`internals.role = 'button'` / `'radio'`). This is safe specifically because neither role needs to expose a *live value* to assistive technology the way a textbox or combobox trigger does — a radio's or button's full state is carried by `aria-checked` / the role itself, so there is no value-mirroring problem to solve on the host. It also collapses the focusable element, the role element, and (for radio) the roving-tabindex participant the group's focus controller drives into a single node, instead of splitting them across host and shadow root. Do not extend this exception to controls that carry a live value (textbox, combobox) — see the [host-role textfield counter-exploration](#why-not-on-the-host) for why that case doesn't work the same way.

```

| Error text surface | Error text wired by `LabellingController` | Associates via `aria-errormessage`. |
| Disabled cascade | `formDisabledCallback(disabled)` | Receives cascade from ancestor `<fieldset disabled>` or owning form. |
| Cross-root name / description from light DOM | `labelledby` / `describedby` properties → `ariaLabelledByElements` / `ariaDescribedByElements` | Element references, not raw IDREFs. |

| Component class | Role placement | Internals (FACE) | IDREF approach | axe note |
|-----------------|----------------|------------------|----------------|----------|
| Text-like (text field) | inner control in shadow DOM | `FieldAssociationController` | `LabellingController` (slotted same-root + light-DOM element refs) | `label` false positive on host |
| Picker / combobox | inner control in shadow DOM | `FieldAssociationController` | `LabellingController` | `aria-required-children` false positive on slotted options |
| Button-like (clear / submit) | inner control in shadow DOM | `ButtonAssociationController` *(pending research)* | n/a | verify role and activation exposure manually |

> | Grouped selection (radio group) | host `role="radiogroup"`, items `role="radio"` | per-item `FieldAssociationController`, coordinated by `RadioGroupController` *(pending research)* | per-item labelling | verify roving focus and group semantics manually |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Button-like (clear / submit) | **host**, via `ElementInternals` — [§3.2 exception](#32-where-aria-roles-live) | `ButtonAssociationController` *(pending research)* | n/a | verify role and activation exposure manually |
| Grouped selection (radio group) | **host**, via `ElementInternals` — [§3.2 exception](#32-where-aria-roles-live): `role="radiogroup"` on the group, `role="radio"` on each item | per-item `FieldAssociationController`, coordinated by `RadioGroupController` *(pending research)* | per-item labelling | verify roving focus and group semantics manually |

```
